The word "astronaut" derives from the Greek words meaning "star" and "sailor." These men and women -- Alan Shephard, John Glenn, Jr., Sally Ride, to name a few -- conjure up images of bravery and adventure. They are modern heroes, helping humanity reach for the stars.

When the space program began in 1959, there were only seven such people in the entire country. They all were then -- or had been in the past -- in the armed forces. Most of them were test pilots, used to the dangers that came from "pushing the envelope." That was only 36 years ago, and since then much has changed.

Today the Americans who make up the shuttle crews are comprised of every race, creed, color, and gender. As of May 2, 1993, 180 men and 21 women astronauts were Caucasian, six men and one woman were African-American, three men and one woman were Hispanic, and two men were of Asian descent.

NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, chooses its astronauts from an increasingly diverse pool of applicants that "looks like America." Thousands of applications come in from all over the world; from these, approximately 100 men and women are chosen for an intensive astronaut candidate training program every two years. "I cannot imagine a better career. I've done more than I could ever have imagined. I'm thankful that I've been at the right place at the right time," says astronaut Kenneth S. Reightler.

The training is demanding, but the study time involved is no longer than that of any other professional career requiring graduate/post-graduate study. If becoming an astronaut is a dream, held long and steadfast, then this labor will be one of love.

The preparation for becoming an astronaut actually begins in elementary school. "It is here that the foundations are laid down and then built upon," comments Colonel Charlie Bolden, Deputy Commandant of Midshipmen at the U.S. Naval Academy. "Start with the basics and get them down first ... you can't do anything without math and science." At this level, students should read everything they can get their hands on about astronauts and space in general. Later, once they have found a specific field of interest, they can begin to focus on that.

But there's more than book learning involved. Other skills Bolden feels are integral to becoming an astronaut are: being able to work as a team player; understanding and appreciating your ethnic, cultural, and American history; and maintaining a grasp on current events.

Bolden does not hold the opinion that America's young people are less equipped than their foreign counterparts. "I listen to people say that American students can't do this and can't do that. I don't buy into or accept that at all. Kids are just as sharp as when I came up. It's just motivation that may be lacking," Bolden said.

It is also interesting to note that out of 195 former and present astronauts, 123 (64%) have taken part in some form of scouting. Scouting develops a sense of discipline, as well as particular skills. Both are crucial to becoming part of the astronaut team.

Once students reach high school, it is particularly important that they earn the best possible grades as well as high standardized test scores (SAT and/or ACT). NASA looks for the best and the brightest, so it makes sense that they would look at how well students apply themselves to their studies. At this point, too, students should begin to think about a specific direction of study, such as engineering, biological or physical science, or mathematics. This will help them direct their education once they get to college.

Again, though, books are only part of the process. It's a good idea to look for out-of-school opportunities like internships or apprenticeships, summer programs, and fieldwork, to help balance textbook learning. After all, going into space is a real-world -- not a virtual -- experience; the more experience you bring to it, the better you'll be able to deal with the demands of the job. Internships are also a good way of finding out if your career choice is the right one for you. Many students, when faced with the realities of a particular field, decide it's not what they wanted, after all. It's better to decide early on that this is the case, before you devote a lot of time and effort to something you don't enjoy.

But choose your activities wisely. "If you do things thinking that, 'This will look good on a resume, or 'I'm not going to like it but it'll help me get selected someday,' you will do yourself a disservice. You're not going to do as well as you would at something in which you're interested," said Reightler.

The "minimum degree requirement" for an astronaut is a Bachelor's degree from an accredited institution. Three years of related increasingly responsible professional experience must follow that degree. Most astronauts to date, however, have continued with their education to the post-graduate (Master's and Ph.D.) levels; they have been able to substitute that education for all or part of their work experience requirement.

NASA contributes funds to 51 colleges and universities through its Space Grant Consortia. If you attend one of these institutions, you are ensured that the curriculum for space programs will conform with the guidelines NASA finds acceptable. However, you can attend any college or university that you wish, since almost all offer degrees in technical fields, math, and science. You should check with a guidance/college counselor -- and NASA -- before you go to confirm that the school will offer the subjects you need.

Regardless of which school you do attend, you once again need to go for the grades. For one thing, you will need them to be accepted into a good Master's program. And for another, NASA needs applicants who can demonstrate success at the higher-education levels.

Math and science are obviously critical to becoming an astronaut, but they are not the only subjects you will need to get where you're going. English -- an ability to communicate, both written and verbally -- is also vital. So is history, not just of the space program, but of the world. And Bolden, who had to wake up extra early to attend a class in basic Russian language to prepare for his mission with a cosmonaut, suggests that every American should be -- at the very least -- bilingual.

"Space," he says, "is a multinational and multicultural operation. Working with Russian cosmonauts is very difficult if astronauts don't know anything about Russian culture and their history as a people." This is also increasingly true as construction of the International Space Station gets underway.

But, says Dr. Ellen Ochoa, a Mission Specialist and the first Hispanic woman in space, "there isn't one particular type of work experience that NASA is looking for. NASA -- like any other employer -- wants to know how well a person has done. If you come from a research background, they'd look at published work in technical journals, lecturing or TA experience, and also any awards that you may have won. Everyone should have summer jobs. You need some sort of experience."

College-level experience will also help you to understand what particular companies are looking for in terms of hiring policies and experience levels. And many students are offered jobs, either when their internship is completed or upon graduation.

So now that you've got the degree and some experience, how do you qualify to become an astronaut? The first step is to fill out an application -- specifically, U.S. Government Form 171, which you send to the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. There it will be reviewed and ranked according to height considerations (you must be at least 58.5 inches), experience, and expertise (i.e. geologists, physicists, chemists, biologists etc.). The competition is fierce -- about 4,000 individuals apply every two years, and the slots are limited.

And if the applicant is looking for a pilot/commander position in the program, then he/she must also be prepared to log in at least 1,000 hours of flight time in command of a jet aircraft prior to consideration. Most of the current and former pilot/commander positions have been filled historically by men who have served or are currently active in the United States Armed Forces. There are only a few exceptions. During training all crew members will train aboard a T-38 jet. The controls are identical to that of the Space Shuttle and, therefore, the jet can be used as a flight simulator either on the ground or in actual flight.

Once the initial ranking is complete, the applications go through a second, more stringent, round to narrow down the field. From the initial 4,000 applicants, only about 118 are asked to come to the JSC and undergo a week of interviews, medical examinations, and basic orientation.

Ochoa noted that the Astronaut Selection Board (ASB) generally looks for people who have done very well in a technical field. And very well does not mean just their grades -- candidates should make sure they have sterling recommendations, especially from undergraduate and graduate school professors who can attest to their problem solving abilities, communication skills, and their ability to work well as part of a team.

The ASB interviews each person and assigns him or her a rating based on: experience and potential, motivation, ability to function as a member of a team, communication skills, and adaptability. Applicants who have impeccable school records and plenty of outside experience but who do not possess the required interpersonal skills for the position, may be rejected solely on that basis. Being an astronaut really means being part of a team.

A significant number of applicants do not meet medical standards, and still others withdraw after gaining a complete understanding of the very demanding job. Based on the information collected during this investigation, ASB will choose its final candidates and pass that recommendation on to the NASA Administrator; he or she will make the final choices. Once selected, candidates begin a rigorous training program.

As with any other career, being an astronaut has drawbacks. One commonly shared among astronauts is the intense workload and the lack of time for their families. "With this job you could work 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and still not get everything done. You have to strike a balance--that is the key," says Reightler. "There can be long hours that are unpredictable. Travel is involved especially during the busiest times -- three months before and two months after a launch," agreed Ochoa.

And if an applicant has hopes for a large salary -- say, comparable to those in the private sector -- they should look elsewhere. Astronauts begin their salary in accordance with the U.S. Government pay scale at GS-11 status (approximately $39,000) and top off at GS-14 status (approximately $78,000). That's not a whole lot for a dangerous job. But for those who dream of going into space, the pay is one of the lesser considerations.
